# MCMC-spectra
This repo contains Python code that does MCMC-based fitting to emission line profiles in astronomical spectra, largely aimed at supernova spectra but certainly with utility for other kinds of objects.

In general, the code will run in two steps. First, the code will read in the file and convert the wavelength to velocity space, then make a least-squares based guess as to the best-fitting model to the relevant emission line, whether that be a multi-component gaussian or single lorentzian(These are the available models given the expected profiles in supernova spectra). The code will output the best-fit values, which the user can then use as a "guess" for the next step, which is MCMC fitting to the emission line to determine parameters with full posterior distributions and thus associated errors. The initial step will also output a full plot of the emission line in velocity space so that the user can determine their own guess.

In the second step, the MCMC chains are run. In this step, the priors will be set by the guess, and the MCMC chains will be run with default 200 parallelized walkers and 10000 iterations, with a 1000 step burn-in. The final results will be plotted in a corner plot with 1 $\sigma$ errors, and the full values are output to a csv file.
The code runs through two separate scripts which perform the two relevant tasks using associated command-line arguments.
To properly run everything, you should install the following non-standard python libraries/modules:
```
pip install emcee
pip install astropy
pip install corner
pip install dust_extinction
pip install specutils
```
In the first step, you can run something like this from the command line to get a feel for the data/potential best-fitting model

```
python3 Reading_in.py Demo/2020ywx_20220202.txt -z 0.0217 --correction 0.023 --pm 500 --wavelength 6563
```
This would read in the data and find the emission profile at $H \alpha$, plotting the continuum-subtracted resulting profile in velocity space given a redshift and extinction correction as well as a buffer of 500 Å around the central wavelength for the fit region.  It also generates a guess for the best-fitting model using basic $\chi^2$ analysis. When the plots are displayed and you have had a look, close them to allow the code to continue running.
The command line arguments available for modification in the first step are the following:

```filename```-The name of the file input. The file must be in one of a couple possible formats(ensure it is in an accessible path from wherever you are running the code):
* ascii file with the first column wavelength(in Å) and second column flux(and ideally third column error)
* similarly-formatted csv file
* fits file with the first extension containing the associated wavelength, flux and error array

 ```-z``` The redshift of the object.
 
 ```--correction``` The dust correction E(B-V) of the object(often inferred from the Sodium Doublet)
 
 ```--pm```- The wavelength range over which to define the fitting region(plus or minus from the central wavelength)
 
 ```--wavelength``` The central wavelength of the line you want to analyze/fit profiles to
 
 ```--continuum_sub``` Whether you want the continuum subtracted-default True

  ```--plot_limits``` Allows you to change the plot limits for a nicer view as the plots display. Default +/- 10000 km/s
   
   ```--lorentzian``` Whether you want to fit a lorentzian as opposed to some combination of gaussians. Default False.

If the generated guess seems incorrect, you can re-run the Reading_in.py script with your own guess(in the form of an ascii file) to check whether that gives a decent fit(by eye) with least squares analysis. In general, ensure you have some good estimate for the error in your spectra as this code does not involve generating errors on your spectra(it will assume 10 $\%$ error if there is no error column in the input file).

In the next step, you run the following command to do the fitting with MCMC with whatever best guess you can generate or the first step generates(with otherwise similar command-line arguments to the first step). The guess file(in the form of an ascii file) should just contain all the components of whatever guess one decides is best(generated by the first step or not). The model used for fitting will be set by the number of components in the guess unless you are fitting a lorentzian in which case you should set this using the command-line arguments. For the example given in the Demo directory, the guess we choose is the one output by the reading in step. We then use this guess to run the second step:
```
python3 Fitting_functions.py Demo/2020ywx_20220202.txt --guess Demo/guess_0202.txt -z 0.0217 --correction 0.023 --pm 500 --wavelength 6563
```
\textbf{This step requires a guess to run}. This script will run through the first script as well as it uses functions from this, so you can quit before the MCMC run if something looks off. This second script takes the same command line arguments with one addition: 

 ```--niter``` The number of MCMC iterations you want to run. Defaults to 10000. Could be modified given some strange behavior of the chains.

The code will check for autocorrelation by ensuring the number of iterations is 40x the autocorrelation time for each parameter. The code should take ~ <5 minutes to run. An MCMC corner plot will show in the python window if you have the matplotlib widget, but it should be easier to look at this through the output .png file.
The final outputs are a corner plot that will save as a .png file(MCMC.png) as well as a csv file with the final posterior distributions and upper and lower errorbars($\pm 1 \sigma$) saved as Final_results.csv.  The reduced $\\chi^2$ will also be output which one can use as a guide to perhaps consider a different model(which you could set by inputting a different guess-i.e. for the example presented here a 3-gaussian works slightly better if input). 
$\textbf{To view some tests/familiarize yourself with the code further, check out the Wiki.}$
